the history of ancient China matters
today because people make it matter
it's a remarkable fact that even a
political leader as iconoclastic and
obsessed with modernization as Mao
Zedong under communism was the same time
obsessed with the reinterpretation of
the history of emperor Qin Shi Huang the
Emperor whom we call in English the
first emperor in the history of China is
anyone in Germany today sincerely
interested in reinterpreting the history
of Emperor Charlemagne their ancient
King in the same way does anyone in
Germany feel that the understanding of
that history has real significance for
what Germany is today how it is governed
today the legitimacy of the leader is
the legitimacy the political system day
and for what Germany ought to be in the
future
I think nobody I think nobody feels that
way England in England does anyone in
England look back on the career of King
Arthur the same way that Mao Zedong and
really that whole generation of the
Communist Party obsessively looked back
to the first time anyone in England care
in the least about any of their ancient
kings and feel that it has this powerful
political significance now and for the
future of England I would say in my
humble opinion nobody feels that way
maybe there are some aristocrats maybe
there are some people in England I
haven't met well maybe there are some
people living at a higher socioeconomic
status who grow up with a very different
view of history but no in mainstream
politics nobody knows the way definitely
in left-wing politics no definitely in
communist politics in England nobody
nobody feels that way um it's really a
bad start for educators high school
teachers or university professors to try
to dazzle the students with the ancient
myths of ancient China what's impressive
about ancient China is not how ancient
it's the extent to which it still really
matters today that it's still really
meaningful and powerful in politics that
it's still a part of state ideology in
China today ancient China is not all
that ancient not compared to Egypt
ancient Egypt is more ancient and more
impressive the pyramids the art of
ancient Egypt
even if you just go to Paris and see
what the French stole from Egypt it's
mind-blowing it's very very impressive
ok
however for political identity in Egypt
today political ideology in Egypt today
they have a huge cultural discontinuity
caused by Islam there is no sense in
which the history or political
philosophy of the ancient rulers of
Egypt matters from modern age today in
the way that ancient China matters for
modernity
I can name two more countries that
really have a more ancient history than
China and the Chinese are very reluctant
to admit this when you talked with us
with a face to face you ever heard of
India India is ancient - and we have
written records going back to an
unbelievably long way in this view of
India you ever heard of a little country
called
Iraq Iraq probably holds the record for
the most ancient civilization in terms
of human beings living in urban
populations living in cities and we have
written records going back a long long
way unbelievably ancient in Iraq however
debates about ancient Iraq pre-modern
pre Muslim Iraq do those matter in Iraq
today the way that the formation of
state ideology and China still matters
of China day even within the Communist
Party even for a unique historical
figure like Mao Zedong that is what's
remarkable so let's begin this video
with a summary instead of ending with a
summary
you have the ancient feeble period of
kingship that we mostly know about from
a book that may hold the record as the
most ancient book or the most ancient
extent you know writing of any length in
history of Chinese civilization which is
memorably titled the book book the Xu
Jing so foolish English this is often
called something like the book of
documents Xu jig so it's saying the same
way that an English Bible is ultimately
just a word that meant book Xu Jing is
an unbelievably nonspecific title this
is an ancient description of how the
kingdom worked a lot of platitudes about
what it is to be a good king what it is
to be a good ruler how but it includes
some platitudes and some descriptions of
how trials worked how the justice system
worked we do get some valuable
historical evidence but it's an
incredibly boring book nobody nobody is
saying philosophically that the question
of how China should be ruled today is
based on this early more fabled period
so moving for you of this this period of
fables you then move forward into the
warring States period and the warring
States Period only has that name because
later on people look back on it and call
it the warring States Period if we're
discussing the history of Western Europe
the whole history is the warring States
Period right look what are you gonna say
the Napoleonic period was the warring
States Period before and after it was
also divided to warn States the warring
States Period is only given this name
when the Han Dynasty is looking back and
contrasting it to the emergence new idea
that China naturally under the Mandate
of Heaven ought to be organized around
the rule of a single Emperor a single
man ought to unify the whole of China
there's a considerable footnote here
that the borders defining the whole of
China exchange from here though warring
States Period we move forward into the
short-lived Qin Dynasty okay this is I'm
not really pronouncing trail
chin with a Jew chin the chin disty qim
has one philosopher in the middle of it
called Lord Xiang Lord Xiang is now in
English described as a legalist all
these categories are pretty meaningless
and here we have a shocking contrast to
the idealism of that earlier period of
fabled monarchs fabled rule we now have
a very brutal very Machiavellian very
pragmatic philosophy of state that is
written by real people talking about
real situations you know this is like
the contrast between you know King
Arthur and reading Aristotle's
down-to-earth analysis of how government
actually works this isn't a fable this
isn't a favor like King Arthur this is
moving forward where suddenly we get a
perspective on history in politics and
which includes how to organize farming
it how to organize the army of course
but how to organize all of society we
have a coherent philosophy from the
middle of the the Qin Dynasty I should
say really just the Qin Kingdom and then
as history progresses Qin conquers more
and more of its neighbors and it reaches
the apex of megalomania under the first
emperor Qin Shi Huang so Qi Chuang is
remembered as the first emperor as you
can already tell from what I've just
said there were other Kings before him
that were other people who could be
described as Empress he actually creates
a new term in Chinese meaning Emperor he
is remembered as the first emperor and
he is remembered for unifying China
he didn't unify all of China under its
current borders but nevertheless what
you then have after the collapse of the
Qin Dynasty after the end of the Qin
Dynasty you have the Han Dynasty and the
Han Dynasty looks back on this history
and it's in that period that for the
first time they have been written
Chinese the warring States Period called
such the period of warring States
followed by the period of unification
under the
and you have the analysis of the chin as
being effective but evil and then the
resolution that as Chinese history moves
forward under the Han Dynasty and the
dynasties that followed that China was
going to be effective but good
so the critique of what was wrong with
the chin the histy the writing of
history to make Jin Chuang a villain
rather than a hero when he unified China
that's the formation of Chinese state
ideology now that's not the whole story
we could make a separate video about
Chinese philosophy of Education the
crucial role that education had in
really cementing this into ancient China
as we know it today when we look back we
tend to remember this more ancient
period as if they already had the system
of exams written examinations that
defined who was a bureaucrat who was a
scholar who participated the system to
cover nothing like that existed in this
period but that that is a later
development it's very important to the
idea of legitimacy and that still exists
in China today I did a recent video that
was called China does not pretend to be
a democracy and they still set this out
they still talk about what's crucial to
the legitimacy of the Chinese Communist
Party the Chinese government today is
they talk a lot about written exams that
in order to be a powerful or influential
person in order to participate in
government in China today they talk
about how many exams these people have
to write that they have to study and
write exams and that qualifies them to
participate in government this is a
contrast in United States of America I
don't know if Donald Trump wrote a
single exam in his life and of course
anyone can be elected to be mayor
senator what have you in most Western
systems of government there is no
examination that defines your legitimacy
but apart from your legitimacy is a
particular politician the whole system
of government is legitimized by
participating in this system of
hierarchical education and that idea
that the exams emanate from the Emperor
and at the same time they then confer
legitimacy on the government of the
Emperor that is a leader that is
later development in Chinese state
ideology in this early period with the
emergence of the Han Dynasty you have a
much simpler linear development there
was the earlier period of kind of fables
the warring States Period the emergence
of the Qin and again the philosophy of
the Qin the political philosophy of the
Qin
we have neatly summed up in this one
remarkable short document the book of
Lord Shang and then we have the
rejection of that the repudiation of
that the critique of that by Han the Han
Dynasty and then the conditions of the
state the idea of what it is to have a
good government that endures from the
Han Dynasty forward for a very long time
that really creates the foundation on
which Buddhism flourishes on which
Confucianism flourishes on which Taoism
flourishes I think if we're being honest
about the the formation of Chinese state
ideology with the book of Lord Shang and
then the critique of the book of our
Chen the rise and fall of the first
emperor Qin Chuang I think it's fair to
say that Buddhism is of almost zero
importance here and I think even Taoism
and Confucianism narrowly defined and
sometimes people use the word
Confucianism just to mean all
traditional Chinese culture but narrowly
defining it I think that Confucianism is
very important to the later period the
Han Dynasty forward their ideas of
legitimacy and good government and what
it is to be a good man and a good civil
servant and so on but I think it's very
important to note that when we're
talking about Jin Chuang Lord Shang even
the Han Fei the Han Fei another early
legalist even the original right end of
the the daodejing of lava I think in
that period we're not really talking
about Confucianism as a major player in
formation of Chinese state ideology yet
okay this
this comes later okay so what really
matters about ancient China is that
nobody will leave this alone is that a
figure even a figure as iconoclastic and
modernizing as Mao Zedong Mao Zedong had
the slogan smash the old Society Mao
Zedong went out and you know called for
the Buddhist temples to be burned down
and destroyed burned the old books
he led a period of kind of unbelievable
hostility towards tradition in ancient
China but he personally from it we know
this already as I think not even a high
school student like a middle school
student he read and studied the
philosophy of Lord Shang Lord Zhang's
idea of government and the state so we
know this at least as a high school kid
he knew about this and cared about this
and right up to his death as an old man
he's looking back at this history and
he's participating in these debates and
by the way when I say participate in
these debates it wasn't merely academic
people got persecuted people got
tortured people got beaten up people got
killed over these debates about
reinterpreting Chinese history looking
back and reinterpreting and he was
especially interested in looking at that
first emperor Qin Shihuang and saying
wait was he really the villain of
history or should we consider him the
hero with an awareness that the later
history that was written after his
regime collapsed history was written by
the victors with the subsequent victor
shouldn't we look back and see that this
is kind of propaganda and that maybe the
archaeological evidence and maybe
reinterpreting the textual evidence we
had would instead show Jin Chuang to be
the hero there is no doubt that Mao
Zedong thought of himself as a figure in
history like Jin Chuang there is a
quotation from him that's now infamous I
think because of the work of Frank
Dakota our modern historian in English
where Mao Zedong boasted that he had
killed an enormous number of
intellectuals that he had burned an
enormous number
books that academics remember Jin Chuang
as a villain for only murdering so many
thousand scholars only burning so many
thousand books but that he Mao Zedong
had killed so many more people and
burned so many more books so therefore
was he a greater man and was he a worse
man the attempts of Mao Zedong to
compare himself to that imperial past
including there's this never-ending
controversy during the Cultural
Revolution of going back there's a
particular opera made about bringing a
complaint to the Emperor and the Emperor
then you know punishing the guy who
dares to complain there's you know even
the reinterpretation of the water margin
during that period and but going back
and reinterpreting this core formation
of state ideology in China looking at
the significance of the first emperor
the significance of that so-called
legalist philosophy especially the one
short book the book of Lord Shan there's
much less interest in the Han Fei Tzu
for whatever reason there's a much
longer book and reconsidering this what
does it mean to be Chinese
what is legitimacy in government why is
it quote unquote the Mandate of Heaven
that all of China should be unified
under the rule of one man oh these
incredibly simple brutal ideas those
have retained currency and gravity and
weight they're still connected to the
idea of what it means to be Chinese
of what it means for something for a
given government to be the legitimate
ruler of China and of course I guess
part of the magic these ancient texts
have is just that China never had the
sort of radical discontinuity in its
history created by Egypt converting to
Islam it's very difficult to imagine
what if Egyptians today still worshipped
the same gods and goddesses that were
worshipped in ancient Veronica Cho what
if it was still Osiris and Isis the
various gods with
what if that still was the predominant
culture in Egypt albeit that it had
evolved through various permutations
various adaptations as the centuries go
by as happens in every culture I mean
Catholicism today is not entirely
continuous with Catholicism 1,000 years
ago
there are discontinuities within that
can we imagine a world in which there
was greater cultural continuity in Egypt
and in which people really cared about
not just the symbolic but the narrative
and legal basis for the legitimacy of
the rule of Pharaohs in HTE were some of
that you know carried forward and was
still part of the debate today I think I
mean it reflects both the weakness and
the strength of Chinese culture the
weakness of being one of the last
countries to have no claim to democracy
just refusing the whole idea that
government is by the people and for the
people they cling to these ideas that
education and writing the exams confers
legitimacy they cling to these ideas
that their ancient history their
connection to Jin Chuang and the Han
Dynasty and the unity of the Chinese
people and the mandate and under heaven
and the greatness and glory of these
ancient texts and ancient monuments and
our key our key art and archaeology of
ancient China they they cling to this in
a way that modern Italy does not cling
to ancient Rome why is one person the
leader of Italy and not another well
because you voted for him it's kind of
simple doesn't mean they have no
interest in each one if some interest
but I mean there isn't this powerful
sense that the legitimacy and ideology
of the ruler of Italy today must connect
to the philosophy of Cicero from you
know ancient Rome to follow the Roman
Republic rise the Empire in that stuff
that history I'm really being since
there was this I really think that
history does not matter to Italy as
passionately and powerfully as the
history of the first emperor in China
still matters to the Communist Party in
China today and still matters to Chinese
people today
not just the intellectual lead I think
the working class the middle class
people of people of average education
people who just finished high school and
went to the workforce believe it or not
sincerely I still think this political
history matters today the formation of
Chinese state ideology has an uncanny
continuity that survived the rise and
fall of Mao Zedong's communism